Would you like to treat some web resource as a git-annex special remote,
importing a tree of files from it with [[git-annex-import]]? This is
really simple to build with a short shell script.

As an example, see [[special_remotes/external/git-annex-remote-internetarchive]].
This treats an [[special_remotes/Internet_Archive]] item as an
[[external_special_remote|special_remotes/external]].

Using it looks like this:

	> git-annex initremote mobydick type=external encryption=none \
        externaltype=internetarchive importtree=yes item=moby_dick_librivox
	> git-annex wanted mobydick include="*.mp3"
	> git-annex import master --from mobydick
	list mobydick ok
	import mobydick mobydick_135_melville_64kb.mp3
	...
	> git merge mobydick/master --allow-unrelated-histories

Note that this needs git-annex 10.20260717 or newer.

Here we'll walk through that example program and explain what it does,
which is an easier start for you building you own than reading the
[[design/external_special_remote_protocol]] and 
its [[import_appendix|design/external_special_remote_protocol/export_and_import_appendix]].

Starting off, it's a portable shell script. But of course you could use
some other language, probably with better results.

    #!/bin/sh
    set -e

This is using version 2 of the protocol, which we start off as follows.

    echo VERSION 2

Probably you'll want some configuration. In this case, it expects
the user to provide an "item=" parameter, which is the Internet Archive
item's name. The `GETCONFIG` message can be used to query for such parameters,
and git-annex will respond with "VALUE whatever". This is a shell
function since it's needed in a couple of different places below.

    getconfig () {
    	echo GETCONFIG item
    	read resp
    	item=$(echo "$resp" | sed 's/^VALUE \?//')
    }

Now the meat of the program, which is just a loop that reads lines from
stdin and dispatches on requests that git-annex sends to it.

    while read line; do
    	set -- $line
    	case "$1" in

The INITREMOTE request is sent when `git-annex initremote` is run,
and it's where you validate any configuration, like the "item" parameter.

    		INITREMOTE)
    			getconfig
    			if [ -z "$item" ]; then
    				echo INITREMOTE-FAILURE "Specify item="
    			else
    				echo INITREMOTE-SUCCESS
    			fi
    		;;

The PREPARE request is sent when git-annex is starting to use the
remote, and is just a place to do any one-time startup actions.
Here it's used to call the `getconfig` function which sets
"$item", which is used below.

    		PREPARE)
    			getconfig
    			echo PREPARE-SUCCESS
    		;;

Now the main event, the LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS request is
sent when git-annex wants to import from your remote.
It outputs 2 lines for each file in the remote,
followed by LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS-SUCCESS.

In the example, the Internet Archive has a JSON API to get information
about an item, and `jq` is used to extract the information it needs.

    		LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS)
    			curl --silent "https://archive.org/metadata/$item/files" | \
    				jq -r '.result[] | (.name, .size, .sha1)' | \
    			while read name; do
    				read size
    				read sha1
    				if [ "$sha1" != null ]; then
    					echo IMPORTABLECONTENT "$size" "$name"
    					echo IMPORTABLECONTENTIDENTIFIER "$sha1"
    				fi
    			done
    			echo LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS-SUCCESS
    		;;

Don't worry too much about the parsing details of the above example.
This is where you'll code up something entirely different.

The main thing you need to determine is what content identifier to use
for a file in your remote. In the example, the Internet Archive has a handy
sha1 available, which is a perfect content identifier. If you're not so
lucky, you can use things like the size+mtime of the file as the content
identifier. It just needs to be unique enough to uniquely identify a
particular version of a file in the web resource that you're treating as a
remote. It's ok if it turns out to not be as unique as you think, because
git-annex of course hashes the files itself, and will notice if a hash
changed.

The example above uses `curl` because it's easy and the Internet Archive
does not need any authentication. If your resource does use authentication,
you may want to let git-annex handle the url download for you, which will 
let it do authentication as supported by `git-credential(1)`, as
well as using its User-Agent etc. Here's how to do that:

            LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS)
                echo DOWNLOAD-URL "https://archive.org/metadata/$item/files"
                read res
                set -- $res
                case "$1" in
                    DOWNLOAD-URL-SUCCESS)
                        shift 1
                        tmpfile="$@"
                        # now process "$tmpfile" and output IMPORTABLECONTENT
                        # and IMPORTABLECONTENTIDENTIFIER as before
                        # (Left as an exercise for the reader.)
                        echo LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS-SUCCESS
                    ;;
                    DOWNLOAD-URL-FAILURE)
                        shift 1
                        echo LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS-FAILURE "$@"
                    ;;
                esac
    		;;

Continuing on, and nearing the home stretch, the RETRIEVEIMPORT
request is git-annex asking that a file be downloaded from the remote.
(This uses an `$importlocation` while we've not dealt with setting
yet, see below.)

    		RETRIEVEIMPORT)
    			echo RETRIEVEIMPORT-URL "https://archive.org/download/$item/$importlocation"
    		;;

If anyone can download the url, perhaps with some HTTP basic auth,
or other authentication supported by `git-credential(1)`,
you can just tell git-annex what url to download and let it do
the work. That's what the example above does.

If you need to download the url yourself, you'll instead need something
like this:
    		
            RETRIEVEIMPORT)
                shift 1
                file="$@"
                curl -o "$file" "https://archive.org/download/$item/$importlocation"
    		;;

Similarly, the CHECKPRESENTIMPORT request is git-annex just checking
if the file still appears to be present in the remote. 
(It does not need to verify that the has the same content that it did when
imported, checking the size or even if HTTP HEAD succeeds is enough.
Although if you can verify the content inexpensively, by all means do so.)

    		CHECKPRESENTIMPORT)
    			key="$2"
    			echo CHECKPRESENT-URL "$key" "https://archive.org/download/$item//$importlocation"
    		;;

And if you need to hit the url yourself, you could do something like this:

            CHECKPRESENTIMPORT)
                key="$2"
                if curl --output /dev/null --silent --head --fail "https://archive.org/download/$item/$importlocation"; then
                    echo CHECKPRESENTIMPORT-SUCCESS
                else
                    echo CHECKPRESENTIMPORT-FAILURE
                fi
    		;;

And that's all! Well, all except for some necessary boilerplate code 
to handle the rest of the protocol that you should never need to modify,
feel free to just copy the rest of this.

    		IMPORTSUPPORTED)
    			echo IMPORTREQUIRED
    		;;
			IMPORT)
				shift 1
				importlocation="$@"
			;;
    		INITREMOTE)
    			echo INITREMOTE-SUCCESS
    		;;
    		*)
    			echo UNSUPPORTED-REQUEST
    		;;
    	esac
    done

If you got this far and have a working program, please
edit [[special_remotes]] and add it to the list of things
that git-annex can use!
