This is an appendix to the [[external_special_remote_protocol]].

Some special remotes interface to a key/value datastore using keys that are
eg hashes, and it won't make sense for them to implement any of this.

When a special remote interfaces with something that looks like a directory
of files, it can either or both of the interfaces described here.

The export interface can be implemented to allow the
[[git-annex-export]] command to be used to store file trees on the special
remote.

The import interface can be implemented to allow the
[[git-annex-import]] command to be used to import file trees from the special
remote that are written by some other tool or process.

Note that, when a special remote implements both interfaces, the user will
need to choose at `initremote` time whether to use `importtree=yes` or
`exporttree=yes`. They won't be allowed to use both, since this interface
is not designed to safely allow import and export with the same special
remote.

[[!toc]]

## export interface

git-annex will use this when the special remote is initialized with
exporttree=yes and without importtree=yes and indicates that it supports
exports.

These are requests git-annex sends to the special remote program.
Once the special remote has finished performing a request, it
should send one of the listed replies. Or, if it does not support
a request, it can reply with `UNSUPPORTED-REQUEST`.

* `EXPORTSUPPORTED`  
  Used to check if a special remote supports exports.
  Note that this request may be made before or after `PREPARE`.
  * `EXPORTSUPPORTED-SUCCESS`  
    Indicates that it makes sense to export to this special remote.
  * `EXPORTSUPPORTED-FAILURE`  
    Indicates that it does not make sense to export to this special remote.
* `EXPORT Name`  
  Comes immediately before each of the following requests (except for
  `REMOVEEXPORTDIRECTORY`), specifying the name of the exported file. It
  will be in the form of a relative path, and may contain path separators,
  whitespace, and other special characters.  
  No response is made to this message.  
  Note that old versions of git-annex had a bug that sometimes prevented
  sending `EXPORT`. To avoid being used with such a buggy version of
  git-annex, send `VERSION 2`.
* `TRANSFEREXPORT STORE|RETRIEVE Key File`  
  Requests the transfer of a File on local disk to or from the previously 
  provided `EXPORT` Name on the special remote.  
  Note that it's important that, while a file is being stored,
  `CHECKPRESENTEXPORT` not indicate it's present until all the data has
  been transferred.  
  While the transfer is running, the remote can send any number of
  `PROGRESS` messages. Once the transfer is complete, it finishes by
  sending one of these replies:
  * `TRANSFER-SUCCESS STORE|RETRIEVE Key`  
    Indicates the transfer completed successfully.
  * `TRANSFER-FAILURE STORE|RETRIEVE Key ErrorMsg`  
    Indicates the transfer failed.
  * `TRANSFER-RETRIEVE-URL Key Url`  
    Rather than the special remote downloading content from an url itself,
    this lets it offload that work to git-annex. This response is a
    protocol extension; it's only safe to send it to git-annex after
    it sent an `EXTENSIONS` that included `TRANSFER-RETRIEVE-URL`.
  * `DELEGATE type=value [params]`  
    Delegate this request to a different type of special remote.
    See [[delegate_appendix]].
* `CHECKPRESENTEXPORT Key`  
  Requests the remote to check if the previously provided `EXPORT` Name is present
  in it.  
  * `CHECKPRESENT-SUCCESS Key`  
    Indicates that a content has been positively verified to be present in the
    remote.
  * `CHECKPRESENT-FAILURE Key`  
    Indicates that a contents has been positively verified to not be present in the
    remote.
  * `CHECKPRESENT-UNKNOWN Key ErrorMsg`  
    Indicates that it is not currently possible to verify if content is
    present in the remote. (Perhaps the remote cannot be contacted.)
  * `CHECKPRESENT-URL Key Url`  
    Rather than the special remote checking an url itself, 
    this lets it offload that work to git-annex. This response is a protocol
    extension; it's only safe to send it to git-annex after it sent an
    `EXTENSIONS` that included `CHECKPRESENT-URL`.
  * `DELEGATE type=value [params]`  
    Delegate this request to a different type of special remote.
    See [[delegate_appendix]].
* `REMOVEEXPORT Key`  
  Requests the remote to remove content stored by `TRANSFEREXPORT`
  with the previously provided `EXPORT` Name.  
  * `REMOVE-SUCCESS Key`  
    Indicates the content has been removed from the remote. May be returned when
    the content was already not present.
  * `REMOVE-FAILURE Key ErrorMsg`  
    Indicates that the content was unable to be removed from the remote.
  * `DELEGATE type=value [params]`  
    Delegate this request to a different type of special remote.
    See [[delegate_appendix]].
* `REMOVEEXPORTDIRECTORY Directory`  
  Requests the remote remove an exported directory.  
  If the remote does not use directories, or `REMOVEEXPORT` cleans up
  directories that are empty, this does not need to be implemented.  
  The directory will be in the form of a relative path, and may contain path
  separators, whitespace, and other special characters.  
  Typically the directory will be empty, but it could possibly contain
  files or other directories, and it's ok to remove those, but better to
  avoid doing so.
  * `REMOVEEXPORTDIRECTORY-SUCCESS`  
    Indicates that a `REMOVEEXPORTDIRECTORY` was done successfully.
  * `REMOVEEXPORTDIRECTORY-FAILURE`  
    Indicates that a `REMOVEEXPORTDIRECTORY` failed for whatever reason.
    Should not be returned if the directory did not exist.
  * `DELEGATE type=value [params]`  
    Delegate this request to a different type of special remote.
    See [[delegate_appendix]].
* `RENAMEEXPORT Key NewName`  
  Requests the remote rename a file stored on it from the previously
  provided `EXPORT` Name to the NewName. Remotes that support exports but not
  renaming do not need to implement this.  
  * `RENAMEEXPORT-SUCCESS Key`  
    Indicates that a `RENAMEEXPORT` was done successfully.
  * `RENAMEEXPORT-FAILURE Key`  
    Indicates that a `RENAMEEXPORT` failed for whatever reason.
  * `DELEGATE type=value [params]`  
    Delegate this request to a different type of special remote.
    See [[delegate_appendix]].

## import interface

(This part is a draft, not implemented yet.)

git-annex will use this interface when the special remote is
initialized with importtree=yes and indicates
that it supports imports.

### content identifiers

The special remote needs to have some way to identify a particular version of a
file. This is called a ContentIdentifier. A good ContentIdentifier needs to:

* Be stable, so when a file has not changed, its content identifier
  remains the same.
* Change when a file is modified.
* Be as unique as possible, but not necessarily fully unique.
  A hash of the content would be ideal.
  A (size, mtime, inode) tuple is as good a content identifier as git uses in
  its index. A (size, mtime) tuple will detect most modifications to files,
  and is usually good enough.
* Be reasonably short, since it will be stored in the git-annex branch.

It's up to the implementor of a external special remote program what
to use for their ContentIdentifier, but not meeting those criteria
will lead to unhappy users, and it's better not to implement this interface if
you can't do it well.

### protocol messages

These are requests that git-annex sends to the special remote
program. Once the special remote has finished performing a request,
it should send one of the listed replies. Or, if it does not
support a request, it can reply with `UNSUPPORTED-REQUEST`.

* `IMPORTSUPPORTED`  
  Used to check if a special remote supports imports.
  Note that this request may be made before or after `PREPARE`.
  * `IMPORTSUPPORTED-SUCCESS`  
    Indicates that it makes sense to import from this special remote.
  * `IMPORTSUPPORTED-FAILURE`  
    Indicates that it does not make sense to import from this special remote.
* `LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS`  
  Used to get a list of all the files that are stored in the special 
  remote. A block of responses
  can be made to this, which must always end with `IMPORTABLECONTENTEND`.
  * `IMPORTABLECONTENT Size Name`  
    A file stored in the special remote. The Size is its size
    in bytes. The Name is the name of the file on the remote,
    in the form of a relative path, and may contain path separators,
    whitespace, and other special characters.  
    Always followed by `CONTENTIDENTIFIER`.
  * `IMPORTABLECONTENTIDENTIFIER ContentIdentifier`  
    Provide the ContentIdentifier for the previous `CONTENT`.
  * `IMPORTABLECONTENTEND`  
    Indicates the end of the block of responses.
  * `DELEGATE type=value [params]`  
    Delegate this request to a different type of special remote.
    See [[delegate_appendix]].
* `IMPORT Name`  
  Comes before each of the following requests,
  specifying the name of the file on the remote. It will be in the
  form of a relative path, and may contain path separators,
  whitespace, and other special characters.  
  No response is made to this message.
* `RETRIEVEIMPORT File`  
  Retrieves the content of a file with the previously provided Name
  from the special remote to the File on local disk.
  While the transfer is running, the remote can send any number of
  `PROGRESS` messages. Once the transfer is complete, it finishes by
  sending one of these replies:
  * `TRANSFER-SUCCESS`
    Indicates that the retrieve was successful.
  * `TRANSFER-FAILURE ErrorMsg`  
    Indicates the retrieve failed.
  * `DELEGATE type=value [params]`  
    Delegate this request to a different type of special remote.
    See [[delegate_appendix]].
* `CHECKPRESENTIMPORT Key`  
  Requests the remote to check if the previously provided Name
  is present in it.
  * `CHECKPRESENT-SUCCESS Key`  
    Indicates that a content has been positively verified to be present
    in the remote.
  * `CHECKPRESENT-FAILURE Key`  
    Indicates that a content has been positively verified to not be
    present in the remote.
  * `CHECKPRESENT-UNKNOWN Key ErrorMsg`  
    Indicates that it is not currently possible to verify if content is
    present in the remote. (Perhaps the remote cannot be contacted.)
  * `DELEGATE type=value [params]`  
    Delegate this request to a different type of special remote.
    See [[delegate_appendix]].

### import example

The protocol starts off with VERSION etc as usual, and
then git-annex asks the special remote if it supports
export and import. In this example it supports both:

	VERSION 1
	EXTENSIONS INFO
	EXTENSIONS
	PREPARE
	EXPORTSUPPORTED
	EXPORTSUPPORTED-SUCCESS
	IMPORTSUPPORTED
	IMPORTSUPPORTED-SUCCESS

git-annex asks for a list of files stored in the special remote:

	LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS

Which responds:

	CONTENT 100 foo
	CONTENTIDENTIFIER 100 48511528411921470
	CONTENT 200 bar
	CONTENTIDENTIFIER 200 48511528411963410
	END

Next git-annex asks for the content of a file to be retrieved.

	IMPORT foo
	RETRIEVEIMPORTED tmpfile

If the file no longer exists, the response would be:

    RETRIEVE-FAILURE file not found

If the file exists, the response would be:

    RETRIEVE-SUCCESS

What if the file exists but has been modified in the time
since LISTIMPORTABLECONTENTS? The external special remote
still retrieves it. git-annex will then notice that the hash
doesn't match.
